# Digital Humanities in English

## Introduction

As the world has steadily become increasingly digitised, the field of digital humanities has ‘exploded into academic consciousness as the Next Big Thing’ (Kopec 333). However, it can be argued that the concept of a singular ‘field’ of digital humanities does not actually exist (Eve 3). More accurately, then, digital humanities can be thought of as a methodological approach which can be applied within the different fields of the humanities (Kopec 331). The methodological approach offered by digital humanities also creates possibilities for interdisciplinary applications, creating a point of contact or synthesis between different fields of humanities research (Eve 3). Within the field of English literature studies, the digital humanities offer tools such as ‘text analysis, data visualization, digital mapping, archival digitization’ and much more (Thakre 17). This paper seeks to present the different possibilities that implementation of digital technology methods within the field of English literature studies can offer while also considering some of the challenges these methods might bring with them.

## Possibilities for the Use of Digital Technologies in the Field of English Literature

The use of digital methods in the study of English literature has deeper roots than some may expect. Reaching all the way back to calls for quantitative analyses of literature in 1923 and modules on ‘Literary Analysis by Computer’ at Dartmouth College in the 1960s, attempts to merge literary analysis with digital and quantitative methods are far from exclusive to the 21st century (Eve 5). However, the increasing use of digital methods as a mode of analysis still remains somewhat controversial subject within the field of English literary studies (Eve 1). This first section of the paper seeks to illuminate some of the opportunities which the use of digital technologies may bring to the study of English literature.

Firstly, digital methods of analysis, as noted previously, already have a long history in the field. Franco Moretti’s concept of ‘distant reading’ is an early and influential example of this merging of literary analysis and digital methodology (Kopec 332). Distant reading utilises computer programmes to analyse individual texts or extensive corpora, giving the researcher access to a wealth of data such as how many times a specific word occurs in a text which allows for analysis and identification of ‘broader literary trends and patterns’ (Thakre 18). With the use of digital technologies, it becomes possible for researchers to process amounts of material that were previously impossible to get through for even a team of researchers (Eve 9). This arguably allows for new ways to engage more closely with literary texts as it gives researchers ‘a new viewport through which to observe […] narratives’ (Eve 4).

Secondly, data visualisation techniques offer new tools that can aid researchers in communicating their findings as visualisations like word clouds, heat maps, and network graphs can ‘provide intuitive insights into the structure, content, and relationships within literary texts’ (Thakre 19). Visualisation can enhance ‘the understanding of complex literary phenomena’ providing both researchers and laymen access to new perspectives on literature (Thakre 19; Eve 2).

Finally, the methodological approach provided by digital humanities can be applied in countless different ways in countless different fields of research. This means that digital humanities methods often exist at – or creates – an intersection of two or more fields of study promoting and, in some cases, necessitating interdisciplinary collaboration (Thakre 18-9). Specifically in the field of English literary research, the implementation of digital technologies as research tools has opened the field up, allowing for more teamwork-based research, which is quite different from the ‘solitary scholar sharing research through a single-author publication’ so common in the field (Kopec 332). This change from individually conducted research to collaborative research has been argued to be a way for the humanities to sustain their ‘potential for relevance’ and ‘regain institutional [while also asserting] themselves as a discipline that trains the future workforce’ (Kopec 333). Altogether then, this opportunity for interdisciplinary collaboration offered by the digital humanities methodological approach seems a valuable addition to the field of English literature research (Thakre 19).

## Challenges to the Use of Digital Technologies in the Field of English Literature

Introducing digital and quantitative methods to a field that has been historically built up around close reading and scholarly interpretation, and analysis has been controversial (Eve 1-2). Some present the methods offered by digital humanities as a replacement for, and thus threat to, the emblematic analytical practices common in the field arguing that: ‘the digital humanities propose a competing vision of the humanities' future, one that would leave little room for the close readers’ (Kopec 325). However, as demonstrated by Eve, ‘there have […] long been quantitative practitioners within the space of literary studies’ in some form and so rejecting the tools offered by digital humanities would be unrealistic (5).

Implementing digital tools in literary research does, however, come with certain challenges that must be considered. One of which is the ethical questions surrounding data privacy and intellectual property rights (Thakre 20). If one is to use digital tools one must also possesses digital material to analyse, and the legal availability of digital literary materials can be quite limited (Eve 11). While some scholars choose to ignore these complicated legal situations – leading to ‘difficult ethical and legal position[s]’ – others manage to work around the issue by analysing texts that have passed out of copyright (Eve 11). 

Another challenge is maintaining data quality and avoiding bias (Thakre 19). This requires researchers to ‘critically evaluate the reliability and validity of digital sources and consider the implications of sampling biases and data incompleteness’ (Thakre 19). This awareness is crucial, however, as long at it is achieved, it arguably strengthens research done using digital methods because it necessitates critical considerations of method and bias which encourages deeper awareness through a meta perspective on the research.

## Conclusion

While the use of digital and quantitative methods in the field of English literary research is perceived by some to be controversial, these approaches are neither new nor are they going anywhere. The proliferation of digital humanities methods has opened the field to new perspectives and possibilities for analytical approaches while also encouraging interdisciplinary collaboration that can allow literary research to extend past internal circles in the field. This methodological approach is not without its challenges, however an awareness of these can greatly improve the quality of the research conducted with the use of digital tools.

## Works Cited

Eve, Martin Paul. ‘Introduction’. The Digital Humanities and Literary Studies, Oxford University Press, 2022, pp. 1-27. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198850489.003.0001 

Kopec, Andrew. ‘The Digital Humanities, Inc.: Literary Criticism and the Fate of a Profession’. PMLA, vol. 131, no. 2, 2016, pp. 324–39. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/26158814 

Thakre, Sarthak Satish. ‘Echoes of the Future: Bridging Tradition and Innovation in Digital Humanities and English Literature’. ShodhGyan-NU: Journal of Literature and Culture Studies, vol. 2, no. 1, 2024, pp. 16-23. https://doi.org/10.29121/shodhgyan.v2.i1.2024.21 
